.\" claudii manual — auto-synced to wiki via GitHub Actions
.TH CLAUDII 1 "April 3, 2026" "claudii 0.17.0" "claudii manual"
.
.SH NAME
claudii \- Fast Claude Code aliases with live model status and session insights
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B claudii
.IR command " [" args ]
.PP
When invoked with no arguments,
.B claudii
shows a contextual summary instead of the help text.
The output adapts to the current state:
an active session (cache file less than 5 minutes old) shows a compact session line
with model, context bar, cost, and rate limits;
a stale session shows the last known data;
a rate-limited state (5h usage \(>= 80%) shows a warning with the reset countdown;
and if no cache exists at all, a brief welcome message with a hint to run
.BR "claudii doctor" .
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B claudii
is a zsh plugin and CLI for Claude Code power users.
Fast aliases to launch Claude with the right model and effort,
live model health in your RPROMPT, and session insights inside Claude Code.
.
.SH INSTALL
.B Homebrew (recommended):
.PP
.RS
.nf
brew tap bmmmm/tap
brew install claudii
.fi
.RE
.PP
Add to
.IR ~/.zshrc :
.RS
.nf
source "$(brew --prefix)/opt/claudii/libexec/claudii.plugin.zsh"
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Manual:
.PP
.RS
.nf
git clone https://github.com/bmmmm/claudii ~/claudii
bash ~/claudii/install.sh
.fi
.RE
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output structured JSON instead of formatted text.
Available for:
.BR status ", " sessions ", " cost ", " trends ", " doctor ", " version .
.TP
.B \-\-tsv
Output tab-separated values (header row + data rows).
Available for:
.BR sessions ", " cost .
.PP
When stdout is not a terminal (piped or redirected) and no explicit format flag is given,
.B claudii
strips ANSI colors and prints plain text.
.B version
prints only the bare version number when piped.
.
.SH DISPLAY LAYERS
.B claudii
provides three display layers plus a session dashboard, each serving a different scope:
.TP
.B ClaudeStatus (RPROMPT)
Model health indicators rendered in the right-hand prompt of your shell.
Reads from a local cache file \(em no network calls in
.IR precmd .
The cache is refreshed automatically in the background when it exceeds
.B status.cache_ttl
seconds.
Indicators:
.B \(dg
= ok (green),
.B \(ti
= degraded (yellow),
.B \(da
= down (red),
.B ?
= API unreachable,
.B \(lB\(el\(rB
= loading (no cache),
.B \(rn
= refreshing (stale cache).
Enable with
.B claudii on
/ disable with
.BR "claudii off" .
.TP
.B Session Dashboard (above prompt)
Rendered above the prompt via the precmd hook.
Shows per-session status lines: model, context %, cost, 5h rate limit with reset countdown.
Only shown after
.B claudii
commands (not after
.B ls
or
.BR git ).
Suppressed automatically after
.BR "claudii se" / si / sessions
since those commands already display session info.
Controlled via the
.B session-dashboard.enabled
config key (values:
.BR on ", " off ;
default:
.BR off ).
.TP
.B CC-Statusline (inside Claude Code)
An info-dense metrics line rendered inside Claude Code sessions via the
.B statusLine
hook in
.IR ~/.claude/settings.json .
Receives live JSON from Claude Code on stdin on every turn and outputs a
single formatted line.
Segments are described in detail in
.B SESSIONLINE SEGMENTS
below.
Enable with
.B claudii cc-statusline on
/ disable with
.BR "claudii cc-statusline off" .
.PP
Data flow:
.RS
.nf
Claude Code \(-> CC-Statusline (stdin JSON) \(-> cache file \(-> Session Dashboard (precmd)
                                           \(-> history-YYYY-MM.tsv (Flight Recorder)
.fi
.RE
.
.SH SESSIONLINE SEGMENTS
Each segment is separated by a dim
.B \(bv
character.
Segments are omitted when their data is absent.
.PP
The output is configurable: by default four lines are emitted.
The layout is controlled by the
.B statusline.lines
config key (see
.BR "CONFIG FILE" ).
.PP
Available segments:
.PP
.TS
l l l.
Segment	Example	Description
_
model	\fBClaude Sonnet 4.5\fR	Model name (bold); effort level appended if != high; \[u25B2] when extended thinking active
context-bar	\[u2588]\[u2588]\[u2588]\[u2588]\[u2588]\[u2591]\[u2591]\[u2591]\[u2591]\[u2591] 62% \[u26A1]73%	Context bar + usable% + cache hit ratio
rate-5h	5h:17% \[u21BA]249m	5h rate limit with reset countdown
rate-7d	7d:50% \[u21BA]3d15h	7d rate limit with reset countdown
cost	$0.42	Session cost in USD (cyan)
tokens	42.1K\(ua 8.3K\(da	Input/output tokens with K/M suffixes
lines-changed	+823 \-201	Git lines added (green) / removed (red); session total
duration	1h 23m	Wall-clock session duration (dim)
api-duration	api:45m	Time spent waiting for Claude API responses (dim)
burn-eta	ETA:180m	Estimated time until 5h limit exhausted (dim)
delta-5h	\[u03B4]5h:+12%	5h rate change since session start
delta-7d	\[u03B4]7d:+3%	7d rate change since session start
cache-create	\[u270E]1.2K	Cache write volume (tokens written into prompt cache)
session-name	my-feature	Session name (set via /rename or --name)
worktree	feat/login \[u23B7] main	Worktree name + branch (dim); falls back to workspace.git_worktree for plain git worktrees
dir	\[u2302] my-app	Working directory: ⌂ symbol + basename of workspace.project_dir (worktree.original_cwd has priority in --worktree sessions)
agent	@orc	Agent name (dim, prefixed @)
ruler	\(em\(em\(em\(em	Horizontal rule filling remaining terminal width
claude-status	Opus \[u2713]  Sonnet \[u2713]  Haiku \[u2713]	Model health from ClaudeStatus cache; \[u26A0] hint (colored) when degraded/down
clock	\[u263E] 23:30 +30m	Local time + bedtime nudge; rendering delegated to \fBcc-insomnii\fR(1) when installed (configurable via \fBstatusline.bedtime\fR, default 23:00; \fBstatusline.insomnii\fR auto/on/off)
.TE
.PP
Segment details:
.TP
.B model
The model display name in
.B bold
(e.g.\&
.BR "Claude Sonnet 4.5" ).
The reasoning effort level from
.B effort.level
in the statusLine JSON is appended in
.I dim
text when set to anything other than
.BR high
(e.g.\&
.IR max ).
When extended thinking is active
.RB ( thinking.enabled
is true), a
.B \[u25B2]
indicator is appended.
.TP
.B context-bar
A 10-character block bar showing context window usage.
Color thresholds are based on the usable context percentage
(used tokens divided by 80% of the context window size):
green < 70%, yellow 70\(en89%, red \(>= 90%.
A dim
.B 1M
indicator is appended when the context window size is >= 1,000,000 tokens.
A
.B >200k
indicator (red) is shown when the current API call exceeded 200k tokens.
When cache read tokens are present, a cache hit ratio is appended as
.B \[u26A1]XX%
(green >= 60%, yellow < 30%, dim otherwise).
.TP
.B rate-5h
5-hour usage shown as
.B 5h:XX%
with optional reset countdown
.RB ( \[u21BA]Xm ", " \[u21BA]XhYm ", or " \[u21BA]Xh
when minutes are zero).
Color: cyan < 50%, yellow 50\(en79%, red >= 80% \(em
based on the underlying usage, not the displayed value.
Only shown when the API returns rate limit data (Pro/Max plans).
.TP
.B rate-7d
7-day usage shown as
.B 7d:XX%
with optional reset countdown:
.BR Xm ", " XhYm ", " Xh ", " XdYh ", or " Xd
depending on remaining time.
Color: same thresholds as
.BR rate-5h .
.TP
.B Inverted display
Set
.B statusline.rate_display
to
.B remaining
to flip the
.B rate-5h
and
.B rate-7d
percentages from "used" to "what's left" \(em e.g.\&
.B 5h:62%
becomes
.BR 5h:38% ,
and the delta
.B Δ5h:+12%
becomes
.BR Δ5h:\(mi12% .
Colors and reset-countdown thresholds are unchanged: "close to limit" still
renders red whether you read it as 86% used or 14% remaining.
.TP
.B cost
Session cost formatted as
.B $X.XX
in cyan.
Omitted when cost is zero.
.TP
.B tokens
Input tokens (with
.B \(ua
arrow) and output tokens (with
.B \(da
arrow) formatted with K/M suffixes (e.g.\&
.BR "15.2K\(ua 4.1K\(da" ).
.TP
.B lines-changed
Lines added in green
.RB ( +N )
and lines removed in red
.RB ( \-N ).
Session-cumulative total (does not reset on git commit).
Omitted when both are zero.
.TP
.B duration
Wall-clock session duration formatted as
.BR <1m ,
.BR 5m ,
or
.B 1h 23m
(dim text).
.TP
.B api-duration
Time actually spent waiting for Claude API responses (as opposed to total wall-clock time),
formatted identically to
.BR duration .
Shown as
.B api:Xm
(dim text).
.TP
.B burn-eta
Estimated time until the 5-hour rate limit is exhausted, shown as
.B ETA:Xm
in dim text.
Only shown when a burn rate can be computed (session >= 3 minutes and rate > 0).
.TP
.B delta-5h
Change in 5h usage since session start, shown as
.B \[u03B4]5h:+N%
or
.BR \[u03B4]5h:\-N% .
Omitted when unchanged.
.TP
.B delta-7d
Change in 7d usage since session start.
Same format as
.BR delta-5h .
.TP
.B cache-create
Volume of tokens written into the prompt cache this session, shown as
.B \[u270E]N
with K/M suffixes (dim text).
Distinct from the
.B \[u26A1]
cache hit ratio in
.BR context-bar :
this shows write volume, not read savings.
Omitted when zero.
.TP
.B session-name
Custom session name set via
.B /rename
or the
.B \-\-name
flag (dim text).
Omitted when not set.
.TP
.B worktree
Worktree name plus branch (
.BR \[u23B7] " branch" )
in dim text.
Shown only when a worktree is active.
.TP
.B dir
Working directory: \[u2302] symbol followed by basename in dim text.
Uses
.B worktree.original_cwd
for
.B --worktree
sessions, otherwise
.B workspace.project_dir
(with
.B workspace.current_dir
as last fallback).
Always visible when the session JSON includes a working directory path.
.TP
.B agent
Agent name prefixed with
.B @
in dim text.
Shown only when present in the session JSON.
.TP
.B clock
Local wall-clock time with bedtime nudge / shame escalation. Rendering is
fully delegated to the standalone
.BR cc-insomnii (1)
plugin: when its binary is on
.B PATH
and
.B statusline.insomnii
is
.B auto
(default) or
.BR on ,
claudii pipes the upstream JSON to cc-insomnii and uses its single-line
output verbatim. When cc-insomnii is not installed, the segment is empty and
the layout silently skips it. Set
.B statusline.insomnii
to
.B off
to suppress delegation entirely.
.IP
Bedtime is forwarded as
.B CC_INSOMNII_BEDTIME
from
.BR statusline.bedtime
(default
.IR 23:00 ,
24-hour HH:MM, local time), and the legacy
.BR statusline.shame ,
.BR statusline.motivation ,
.B statusline.rainbow
keys (if present) are forwarded as the matching
.B CC_INSOMNII_*
env vars so a single config drives both. See
.BR cc-insomnii (1)
for the full set of escalation modes, animations, and message catalog.
.B claudii doctor
reports detection status and active mode.
.TP
.B ruler
Fills the remaining terminal width with horizontal rule characters (\(em).
Relies on
.B $COLUMNS
for width detection; falls back to
.B tput cols
and then to 60 columns when neither is available (e.g. CC piped context).
Used as the default last line (line 5) to visually separate claudii output
from Claude Code hint lines.
.
.SH COMMANDS
.
.SS Aliases
Shell functions for fast Claude Code access.
Configured via
.B aliases.*
in config.
Auto-fallback to a healthy model when the configured model is down.
.
.TP
.B cl
Claude Sonnet, high effort. General-purpose default.
.TP
.B clo
Claude Opus, high effort. Complex tasks, server work.
.TP
.B clm
Claude Opus, max effort. Maximum reasoning.
.TP
.B clq
Claude Sonnet, medium effort. Search mode \(em launches in
.IR search.dir .
Equivalent to
.BR "claudii search" .
.TP
.B clh
Show the alias table and run a live model health check (current model status).
.TP
.B clorch
Example agent alias: launches Claude Opus (high effort) with the
.B orchestrate
skill as system prompt.
Configured via
.BR "claudii config set agents.clorch.*" .
See
.BR "claudii agents" .
.TP
.B cle
Example agent alias: launches Claude Sonnet (medium effort) with the
.B explorer
skill as system prompt.
Configured via
.BR "claudii config set agents.cle.*" .
See
.BR "claudii agents" .
.
.SS Display Layer Control
Global and per-layer toggles for all display components.
.
.TP
.B on
Enable all display layers at once:
ClaudeStatus RPROMPT (sets
.B statusline.enabled
to true),
Session Dashboard above prompt (sets
.B session-dashboard.enabled
to on),
and CC-Statusline inside Claude Code (writes
.B statusLine
to
.IR ~/.claude/settings.json ).
.
.TP
.B off
Disable all display layers at once.
.
.TP
.BR "claudestatus " [on|off]
Toggle only the ClaudeStatus RPROMPT.
Reads/sets
.B statusline.enabled
in config.
Without subcommand: show current state.
.
.TP
.BR "session-dashboard " [on|off]
Control the Session Dashboard (session lines above the prompt).
Without subcommand: show current state.
.RS
.TP
.B on
Enable the session dashboard.
.TP
.B off
Disable the session dashboard.
.RE
.IP
.BR "dashboard " [on|off]
Deprecated alias for
.BR "session-dashboard" .
Still works for backwards compatibility.
.
.TP
.BR "cc-statusline " [on|off]
Toggle only the CC-Statusline inside Claude Code.
Modifies
.IR ~/.claude/settings.json .
Without subcommand: show current state.
.
.TP
.BR "insomnii " [on|off|auto|status|install]
Manage the
.BR cc-insomnii (1)
delegation for the
.B clock
segment without leaving claudii. Subcommands:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B on
\(em set
.B statusline.insomnii=on
(require delegation; doctor warns if the binary is missing).
.IP \(bu 2
.B off
\(em set
.B statusline.insomnii=off
(suppress delegation; the clock segment renders nothing).
.IP \(bu 2
.B auto
\(em set
.B statusline.insomnii=auto
(default; delegate when installed, skip when not).
.IP \(bu 2
.B status
(or no argument) \(em show binary path, current delegation mode, and the
forwarded
.B statusline.bedtime
value.
.IP \(bu 2
.B install
\(em clone
.B $CC_INSOMNII_REPO
(default
.IR https://github.com/bmmmm/cc-insomnii )
into
.B $CC_INSOMNII_CLONE_DIR
(default
.IR ~/.local/share/cc-insomnii-src )
and run its
.BR install.sh .
Idempotent \(em re-running upgrades from the latest checkout.
.RE
.
.TP
.B explain
Show component overview: ClaudeStatus (RPROMPT), Session Dashboard (above prompt),
CC-Statusline (inside Claude Code). Includes current status, config, data flow,
and a reference legend for all symbols and fields used in the output.
Aliases:
.BR layers ", " components .
.PP
.B Session Dashboard symbols:
.PP
.RS
.nf
\[u25CF]    active           session or service is active
\[u25CB]    inactive         session ended or service is off
\[u2588]\[u2591]  context bar      context window fill (8 blocks = 100%)
\[u26A1]    cache ratio      % of input served from prompt cache
|    separator        field separator (dim)
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B CC-Statusline fields:
.PP
.RS
.nf
\[u2588]\[u2591]  context bar      context window fill (10 blocks = 100%)
$    cost             session cost USD
5h:  5h rate limit    token budget used %
7d:  7d rate limit    token budget used %
\[u21BA]    reset            minutes until rate limit refreshes
\[u2191]    input tokens     tokens sent to model this session
\[u2193]    output tokens    tokens received from model
\[u26A1]    cache ratio      % of input served from prompt cache
+/-  lines changed    code added / removed
     duration         total session time
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B ClaudeStatus (RPROMPT) indicators:
.PP
.RS
.nf
\[u2713]    ok               model operational
\[u26A0]    degraded         partial outage
\[u2717]    down             major outage
\[u27F3]    refreshing       background check running
?    unreachable      status.claude.com not reachable
.fi
.RE
.
.SS ClaudeStatus
Live model health monitoring in your shell RPROMPT.
Uses the Statuspage components API; falls back to the RSS feed for per-model incident details.
.
.TP
.B status
Live model health check (always bypasses the cache).
Displays a per-model status table with icons and labels for each configured model
(ok \(en green, degraded \(en yellow, down \(en red, unknown \(en dim).
Shows the time since the last check and the configured refresh interval.
Supports
.B \-\-json
(array of model/status objects).
.
.TP
.BR status " 5m|15m|30m|60m"
Set the background cache refresh interval (default: 15m).
Values below 30s are rejected.
.
.PP
RPROMPT indicators:
.B \(dg
= ok (green),
.B \(ti
= degraded (yellow),
.B \(da
= down (red),
.B ?
= API unreachable.
.B \(lB\(el\(rB
= loading (no cache),
.B \(rn
= refreshing (stale cache).
.
.SS Session Dashboard
Rendered in the shell above the prompt line via
.IR precmd .
Reads per-session cache files written by the CC-Statusline handler.
Shows per-session lines: model name, context %, cost, 5h rate limit with reset countdown.
Only shown after
.B claudii
commands; suppressed after
.BR "se" / si / sessions
since those already display session info.
.PP
Data flow:
.RS
Claude Code \(-> CC-Statusline (stdin JSON) \(-> cache file \(-> Session Dashboard (precmd)
.RE
.
.SS CC-Statusline
Rendered inside Claude Code sessions via
.IR ~/.claude/settings.json .
Shows model name, context usage bar, cost, token counts, rate limits,
lines changed, session duration, burn-eta, worktree name, and agent context.
The output is split across configurable lines (default: 4 lines) via
.B statusline.lines
in config.
.
.TP
.B cc-statusline
Show whether the CC-Statusline is active.
.
.TP
.B "cc-statusline on"
Add the CC-Statusline to
.IR ~/.claude/settings.json .
Restart Claude Code to activate.
.
.TP
.B "cc-statusline off"
Remove the CC-Statusline from
.IR ~/.claude/settings.json .
.
.TP
.B "cc-statusline preset " [name]
Switch the CC-Statusline layout to a named preset by writing
.B .statusline.lines
in
.IR ~/.config/claudii/config.json .
Without a name, lists the available presets.
Available presets:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B focused
\(em dense 3-line layout. Line 1: model + dir (identity).
Line 2: context-bar + rate-5h + rate-7d (metrics).
Line 3: claude-status + vpn (env).
For users who want everything important on screen without scrolling past noise,
split so no single line overflows on narrow terminals.
When
.B cc-insomnii
is installed,
.B claudii cc-statusline on
wires it up as a wrapper (cc-insomnii --after=claudii-cc-statusline), so
the insomnii line appears on top of the focused layout automatically \(em
no clock segment needed inside the preset.
.IP \(bu 2
.B calm
\(em bare 2-line layout. Line 1: model (with effort + thinking arrow).
Line 2: context-bar. Nothing else. Pure calmness.
.IP \(bu 2
.B default
\(em restore the shipped 5-line layout with every segment.
Use this to revert after experimenting with another preset.
.RE
.IP
After switching, restart Claude Code (or wait for the next render) to see the new layout.
The preset writes
.B .statusline.lines
directly, so you can hand-edit afterwards without losing the change.
.
.SS Sessions and Cost
.
.TP
.B sessions
List active and recent Claude Code sessions with model, context usage,
cost, rate limits, worktree name, and agent context.
Shows per-session details and an aggregate summary.
A third line per session shows the fingerprint: top-5 files accessed via tool calls,
formatted as
.BR "name(N) name(N) ..."
(omitted when no JSONL transcript is available).
Sessions are detected from cache files written by the CC-Statusline handler.
Supports
.B \-\-json
(array of session objects with
.BR fingerprint " and " last_user_message
fields) and
.B \-\-tsv
(tab-separated rows).
.
.TP
.BI "sessions \-\-resume " id
Resume a Claude Code session by ID.
Equivalent to
.BR "claude --resume " id .
The session ID can be obtained from
.B claudii se
(shown as the first 8 characters of the session ID in the detail line).
Alias:
.BR "se --resume " id .
.
.TP
.B sessions-inactive
Show inactive (ended or stale) Claude Code sessions.
Lists sessions that are no longer active, with age, context usage, and rate-limit data.
Each session shows a status badge: pinned (protected from GC), stale (pending GC),
or idle (recently ended).
A shortened session ID is shown for use with
.BR pin / unpin .
Alias:
.BR si .
.
.TP
.BI "pin " session-id
Protect an inactive session from garbage collection.
Matches by session ID substring (first match wins).
Pinned sessions are preserved indefinitely until explicitly unpinned.
.
.TP
.BI "unpin " session-id
Remove GC protection from a pinned session.
.
.TP
.B gc
Remove stale session cache files.
A session cache file is removed when its associated Claude Code process is dead
and the file is older than 300 seconds, or when no PID is tracked and the file
is older than 300 seconds.
Pinned sessions (set with
.BR pin )
are never removed.
Equivalent to the automatic garbage collection that runs on shell load,
but triggered manually.
Use
.B claudii si
to inspect inactive sessions before running.
.
.TP
.BI "resume " session-id
Resume a Claude Code session by ID.
Equivalent to running
.BR "claude --resume " id .
Use
.B claudii se
to list sessions with their IDs.
.
.TP
.B cost
Accounting view: exact costs per period (today, week, month, year, all-time),
per-model breakdown, and session counts.
Week period includes a date range.
Falls back to session cache files
.RI ( session-* )
when no history exists yet.
Supports
.B \-\-json
(object with today/alltime breakdown) and
.B \-\-tsv
(period/model/cost/sessions rows).
.
.TP
.B trends
Visualization view: rolling 7-day window (most recent day first) with per-day cost,
tokens, session count, and model breakdown.
Also shows 30-day model distribution split, the costliest day in the last 30 days,
median daily cost (30d), and a 7-day vs 30-day spend trend with direction arrow.
The Total line includes session count and model breakdown for the 7-day window.
The CC-Statusline handler appends a line to monthly files
.RI ( ~/.cache/claudii/history-YYYY-MM.tsv )
on every update. Legacy
.I history.tsv
files are also read for backward compatibility.
Supports
.BR \-\-json .
.
.TP
.B cache
Prompt-cache view: per-day hit rate (rolling N-day window, default 7),
per-model hit rate, and total tokens served from cache.
Reads from a per-session JSON cache aggregated by
.B claudii-insights
from the JSONL transcripts under
.IR ~/.claude/projects .
The first invocation is slower (5\(en30 s) while the cache is built;
subsequent runs only re-aggregate sessions whose JSONL has been
touched since the last scan.
.RS
.TP
.BI "\-\-days " N
Override the rolling window (default 7).
.RE
.
.SS Config
.
.TP
.B config
Show all config values.
.
.TP
.BI "config get " key
Read a config value using dot-notation.
Example:
.BR "claudii config get aliases.cl.model" .
.
.TP
.BI "config set " "key value"
Set a config value.
Example:
.BR "claudii config set statusline.models opus,sonnet" .
.
.TP
.B "config reset"
Reset all config to defaults.
.
.TP
.BI "config export " "[file]"
Print config as JSON, or write to
.I file
if specified.
.
.TP
.BI "config import " file
Replace current config with a JSON file (backs up the existing config first).
.
.TP
.B "config theme"
List available color themes.
The active theme is marked with an asterisk.
.
.TP
.BI "config theme " name
Set the active theme by name.
Available themes:
.B default
(magenta accent, standard ANSI colors) and
.B pastel
(softer 256-color palette).
The theme name is stored as
.B theme.name
in
.IR config.json .
Unknown theme names print an error and exit non-zero.
.
.SS Agents
.
.TP
.B agents
List configured agents (alias \(-> skill mapping) or show onboarding instructions.
Agents let you launch Claude with a specific skill as the system prompt using a short
alias instead of a long
.B \-\-append\-system\-prompt
flag.
.PP
When agents are configured in
.I config.json
under the
.B agents
key, a left-aligned table is shown:
.RS
.nf
ALIAS     SKILL         MODEL   EFFORT
clorch    orchestrate   opus    high
cle       explorer      sonnet  medium
.fi
.RE
.PP
Followed by the hint: \(dqType the alias to launch.\(dq
.PP
When no agents are configured, an onboarding message is shown with the equivalent
manual command, setup instructions, and a list of skills found in
.I .claude/skills/*/SKILL.md
in the current directory.
.PP
Supports
.B \-\-json
(array of objects with
.BR alias ", " skill ", " model ", " effort
fields).
.PP
Configure agents via:
.RS
.nf
claudii config set agents.clorch.skill orchestrate
claudii config set agents.clorch.model opus
claudii config set agents.clorch.effort high
.fi
.RE
.
.SS Local agents (oMLX / gateii)
.
.TP
.B "omlx status"
Show whether the omlx segment is wired into the cc-statusline, the
configured / detected
.I active.json
path, oMLX server reachability, and oMLX CLI install state.
.TP
.B "omlx connect"
Detect a gateii install at one of the well-known paths
.RB ( "~/offline_coding/gateii" ", " ~/coding/gateii ", " "..." ),
store a non-default path under
.B statusline.omlx_active_path
if needed, append
.B ["omlx"]
to a custom
.B statusline.lines
layout (no-op if you're on built-in defaults \(em those already
include the segment), and probe the oMLX server.
.TP
.B "omlx test"
Render the cc-statusline against a synthetic
.I active.json
+ a temporary layout that includes the
.B omlx
segment. Useful to preview
\(*ra commit-msg Qwen3.5-9B 3s
without a real agent running.
.TP
.B "omlx disconnect"
Surgically remove the
.B \(dqomlx\(dq
entry from any custom
.B statusline.lines
layout. Drops the line entirely if it had no other segments.
.PP
Override the
.I active.json
path via env
.B CLAUDII_OMLX_ACTIVE
or config key
.BR statusline.omlx_active_path .
The segment is silently empty (and its line dropped) when no agent is
active or gateii is not installed \(em zero impact for users without gateii.
.
.SS VPN tunnel state (vpnii)
.
The VPN segment in cc-statusline and RPROMPT shows the active tunnel name
from
.IR ~/.cache/claudii/vpnii .
That file is normally written by wg-quick PostUp/PreDown hooks; because
wg-quick runs as root, those hooks would otherwise create a root-owned
file that can't be cleaned up without sudo.
.B claudii vpnii
wraps the write/clear and drops privilege to the real user, so the cache
file is always owned by you.
.PP
.B Recommended wg conf:
.PP
.RS
.EX
[Interface]
\&...
PostUp  = claudii vpnii set HomeLab
PreDown = claudii vpnii clear
.EE
.RE
.TP
.BI "vpnii set " "<name>"
Mark tunnel
.I name
as active. Resolves the target user via
.B SUDO_USER
\(rA
.I /dev/console
owner (macOS GUI session) \(rA
.B $USER
\(rA
.B CLAUDII_USER
override. Pass
.B "\-\-user " <name>
to override explicitly.
.TP
.B "vpnii clear"
Remove the state file. Aliases:
.BR "vpnii down" ", " "vpnii off" .
.TP
.B "vpnii show"
Print the current tunnel name, or
.I "no tunnel"
when none is set. Alias:
.BR "vpnii status" .
.PP
Tailscale is detected separately via interface scan
.RB ( "ifconfig"
for an IPv4 in 100.64.0.0/10) and needs no state file. Renders as
.B "⬢ ts"
next to any active WireGuard tunnel.
.
.SS Vibemap (activity heatmap)
.
Opt-in tracking of when you prompt, rendered as an ASCII heatmap.
Default
.BR off .
When enabled
.RB ( vibemap.enabled
in config), the cc-statusline appends one TSV line per render to
.IR ~/.cache/claudii/vibemap.tsv .
The file is local-only, never transmitted, and stores no prompt content.
Schema:
.BR "epoch \\\\t weekday \\\\t hour \\\\t minute \\\\t model \\\\t sid8 \\\\t delta_ms" .
.PP
.B Subcommands:
.PP
.TP
.B "vibemap"
Default view: weekday \[mu] 3-hour-bin grid (Mon\(enSun on the X axis,
00\(en03 / 03\(en06 / \... / 21\(en00 on the Y axis). Cells normalized
to the max-cell count; bins overlapping the bedtime window render in
red so peak overdue-vibing is obvious at a glance.
.TP
.BI "vibemap strip" " [--days N]"
Last
.I N
days \[mu] 24 hours strip (default 14, range 1\(en90). One row per
calendar day, today marked with
.BR * .
Hours within the bedtime window render in red.
.TP
.B "vibemap status"
Show whether tracking is on, the file path, the entry count, file
size, and the timestamp of the oldest entry.
.TP
.B "vibemap path"
Print the vibemap file path \(em useful for piping into custom tools
.RB ( "awk -F'\\\\t' \... \"$(claudii vibemap path)\"" ).
.TP
.B "vibemap clear"
Remove the vibemap file. No confirmation \(em the file is reproducible
the moment you submit your next prompt with tracking enabled.
.PP
.B Enable:
.PP
.RS
.EX
claudii config set vibemap.enabled true
.EE
.RE
.PP
.B Privacy notes:
.PP
The vibemap file is plain TSV in your local cache directory. It records
when you prompted (epoch + weekday + hour + minute), which model you
were on (first word, e.g.\&
.IR Opus ),
the first 8 chars of the session ID, and the duration delta vs the
previous render. It does NOT record prompt content, file paths, or
model output \(em the cc-statusline JSON doesn\(aqt include those in
the first place.
.B claudii vibemap clear
removes the file completely;
.B claudii config set vibemap.enabled false
stops further writes without deleting existing data.
.
.SS System
.
.TP
.BI "search " "['query']"
Launch Claude Code in the configured search directory
.RI ( search.dir " in config, default:" " ~/claude-search" ).
Uses the
.B clq
alias settings.
If
.I query
is provided, it is passed as the initial prompt.
.
.TP
.B restart
Reload the plugin by sourcing
.IR ~/.zshrc .
Stays in the current directory.
.
.TP
.B update
Update claudii to the latest version.
Auto-detects the install method:
if
.B CLAUDII_HOME
is under the Homebrew prefix, runs
.BR "brew upgrade claudii" ;
if it is a git repository, runs
.BR "git pull --ff-only" ;
otherwise prints instructions for both methods and exits with an error.
After updating, run
.B claudii restart
to reload the plugin.
.
.TP
.B version
Print the version string and about info when running interactively.
When piped (stdout is not a terminal), prints the bare version number without the
.B "claudii v"
prefix.
Supports
.BR \-\-json .
.
.TP
.B changelog
Shows release notes for the current version from CHANGELOG.md.
Alias:
.BR about .
.
.TP
.B doctor
Run an installation health check.
Verifies that Claude Code and jq are installed,
that the CC-Statusline is configured in
.IR ~/.claude/settings.json ,
that the cache directory exists,
that completions are present,
and that the plugin is loaded.
Also reports the installed version.
Supports
.B \-\-json
(array of check result objects with
.BR check ", " status ", " detail
fields).
.
.SH SHORTCUTS
Shorthands expand to their full command before processing.
.PP
.TS
l l.
s	status
se	sessions
ss	sessions
si	sessions-inactive
c	cost
t	trends
d	doctor
about	changelog
.TE
.PP
Example:
.B claudii s
is identical to
.BR "claudii status" .
.
.SH CONFIG FILE
User config:
.I ~/.config/claudii/config.json
(or
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/claudii/config.json
if set).
Created automatically from defaults on first run.
.PP
Key paths (dot-notation):
.PP
.RS
.nf
aliases.cl.model        model for \fBcl\fR (default: sonnet)
aliases.cl.effort       effort for \fBcl\fR (default: high)
aliases.clo.model       model for \fBclo\fR (default: opus)
aliases.clm.effort      effort for \fBclm\fR (default: max)
aliases.clq.model       model for \fBclq\fR / search (default: sonnet)
fallback.enabled        auto-fallback on outage (default: true)
fallback.opus.model     fallback model when opus is down
status.cache_ttl        cache TTL in seconds (default: 900)
statusline.enabled      ClaudeStatus in RPROMPT (default: true)
statusline.models       models to monitor (default: opus,sonnet,haiku)
statusline.lines        CC-Statusline layout: array of arrays, each inner array is one output line listing segment IDs in order (default: 3 lines — see SESSIONLINE SEGMENTS for all valid IDs). A single inner array produces a 1-line statusline.
statusline.rate_display rate-5h/rate-7d display mode: \fBused\fR (default — \fB5h:62%\fR shows consumed budget) or \fBremaining\fR (\fB5h:38%\fR counts down what's left). Color thresholds key off the underlying usage in both modes, so "close to limit" stays red regardless of which side is shown.
session-dashboard.enabled  session dashboard mode (default: off; values: on/off)
debug.level             log level (default: off)
search.dir              search directory (default: ~/claude-search)
ui.spinner              spinner mode for long-running commands (default: random; values: random, beam, wave, dots, pulse, bounce, arc, orbit, ascii)
.fi
.RE
.
.SH STATUS CACHE
The model status cache is stored at
.IR "${XDG_CACHE_HOME:-~/.cache}/claudii/status-models"
(overrideable via
.BR CLAUDII_CACHE_DIR ).
It persists across terminal sessions and reboots.
It contains one line per model:
.PP
.RS
.nf
opus=ok
sonnet=down
haiku=ok
.fi
.RE
.PP
The cache is refreshed automatically in the background when it exceeds
.B status.cache_ttl
seconds.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CLAUDII_HOME
Path to the plugin directory. Set automatically.
.TP
.B CLAUDII_CACHE_DIR
Override the cache directory (default:
.IR ${XDG_CACHE_HOME:-~/.cache}/claudii ).
.TP
.B CLAUDII_LOG_LEVEL
Override the debug log level (off, error, warn, info, debug).
.TP
.B CLAUDII_SPINNER_MODE
Override the spinner animation for long-running commands (random, beam, wave, dots, pulse, bounce, arc, orbit, ascii). Takes precedence over the
.B ui.spinner
config key. Useful for one-off invocations.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Overrides the config directory (default:
.IR ~/.config ).
.TP
.B XDG_CACHE_HOME
Overrides the base cache directory (default:
.IR ~/.cache ).
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/claudii/config.json
User configuration.
.TP
.I $CLAUDII_HOME/config/defaults.json
Shipped defaults (read-only reference).
.TP
.I ~/.cache/claudii/status-models
Per-model status cache.
.TP
.I ~/.cache/claudii/session-*
Per-session cache files written by the CC-Statusline handler.
Contains model, context percentage, cost, and rate limit data.
.TP
.I ~/.cache/claudii/history-YYYY-MM.tsv
Persistent session history (Flight Recorder), rotated monthly.
TSV file with one line per CC-Statusline update:
timestamp, model, cost, context percentage, 5-hour rate, session_id,
input_tok, output_tok, api_duration_ms.
Legacy
.I history.tsv
is also read for backward compatibility.
Read by
.BR "claudii trends"
and
.BR "claudii cost" .
.TP
.I ~/.claude/settings.json
Claude Code settings, modified by
.BR "claudii cc-statusline" .
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Enable all display layers:
.B claudii on
.TP
Live health check:
.B claudii status
.TP
Toggle only ClaudeStatus:
.B claudii claudestatus off
.TP
Toggle only Session Dashboard:
.B claudii session-dashboard on
.TP
Toggle only CC-Statusline:
.B claudii cc-statusline on
.TP
Check every 5 minutes:
.B claudii status 5m
.TP
Component overview:
.B claudii layers
.TP
Publish a release:
.B bash scripts/release.sh 0.7.0
.TP
Dry-run to verify pre-flight checks:
.B bash scripts/release.sh 0.7.0 \-\-dry-run
.TP
Read a config value:
.B claudii config get aliases.cl.model
.
.SH VISUAL LANGUAGE
claudii uses a consistent set of symbols across all output:
.PP
.TS
l l l.
Symbol	Meaning	Color
_
\(bu	active session	green
\(ci	ended / inactive	dim
\(tf	warning (rate limit, stale cache)	yellow
\(mu	error / failure	red
\(OK	ok / success	green
\(da	down (model unavailable)	red
~	degraded (partial outage)	yellow
|	separator	\(em
\[u2588]	progress bar \(em filled block	context-sensitive
\[u2591]	progress bar \(em empty block	dim
.TE
.PP
The helper function
.B _claudii_sym
.RI ( lib/visual.sh )
accepts a name
.RB ( active ", " inactive ", " warn ", " error ", " ok ", " down ", " degraded ", " sep )
and prints the corresponding colored symbol.
Constants are prefixed
.B CLAUDII_SYM_
(symbols) and
.B CLAUDII_CLR_
(ANSI colors).
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR claude (1),
.BR cc-insomnii (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR zsh (1)
.
.SH AUTHOR
bmmmm
.SH PROJECT
.UR https://github.com/bmmmm/claudii
.UE
